JD: Moved file and deleted front material

## Assignment 4

Paper: Zwaan, B., Bijlsma, R., & Hoekstra, R. F. (1995).
		ARTIFICIAL SELECTION FOR DEVELOPMENTAL TIME IN 
		DROSOPHILA MELANOGASTER IN RELATION TO THE EVOLUTION OF AGING: 
		DIRECT AND CORRELATED RESPONSES. Evolution, 49(4), 635-648. 
		https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1558-5646.1995.tb02300.x


Test 1: Developmental Time and Viability
"Figure 2 shows that selection for developmental time was very successful for both males and females. In the final generation, mean developmental time was about 9.5, 11, and 13.5 d for fast, control,
and slow lines, respectively, and these differences appear to be statistically significant (ANOVA; table 1). The data in
table 1 show significant differences between replicates within one treatment. However, from generation 3 onward, all replicates within one treatment significantly differed from any
other replicate of the other treatments (SNK tests).

The sexes did not respond differently to selection (treatment by sex), and no differences in developmental time were observed between the sexes (sex). In general, females are found
to have a shorter developmental period than males, but this difference seems to become less prevalent or even to disappear at higher egg-densities (Zwaan et al. 1991), which
perhaps explains the absence of sex differences in this experiment. In the fast lines, relaxation of selection resulted in
a significantly increased developmental time."

Describe the Issue: The authours cannot say "they sexes did not respond differently to selection" without an equivalence test. 

JD: I agree that they absolutely need an equivalence test, but I don't like that language anyway. There is still presumed to be _some_ difference if you don't accept the null.

Further, the cited study says the effect becomes less prevalent at high densities, not that it disappears entirely.

Revised Statement: Although females typically have shorter developmental periods than males, the effect of sex on developmental time here was statistically unclear.


Test 2: Body Weight
Adult body weight was significantly affected by the applied
selection: fast females and males had lower body weights,
whereas slow females and males had higher body weights
than the control flies (fig. 4; table 4). There was considerable
variation in body weight among the generations, and, on the
whole, female body weight, as also shown in figure 4, appears
to be more variable than male body weight, probably as the
result of confounding effects of egg production of females.
As expected, males were lighter than females, but apart from
this difference, females and males did not differ in the direction 
of response to selection (table 4). Relaxed fast lines
had smaller body weights than selected fast lines, which was
not anticipated. However, relaxation of the slow lines had no
significant effect on the body weight of the flies (ANOVAs
not shown). The differences in adult body weight were still
significantly present 12 generations after selection was
stopped for both females and males (checkup, fig. 4; ANOVA
not shown). Note that both dry weight and fat-free dry weight
showed the same significant overall effects as described for
body weight.

On the basis of the observations that, (1) fat fractions and
also water fractions (ANOVA not shown) were unaffected
by selection, (2) the physiological correlation between fat
fraction and starvation resistance remained intact, and (3)
live weight, dry, and fat-free dry weight, and fat weight were
affected in identical ways, one can conclude that selection
for developmental time had exerted no effect on the grossbody 
composition of the flies."

Describe Issues:
They say that "as expected, males were larger than females" but to what degree?
	D. melanogaster males are usually some % lighter than females. "Relaxed fast lines
	had smaller body weights than selected fast lines, which was
	not anticipated." The authours need to present the size of the effect (how much), not just whether there was an effect or not
	they should have presented how much lighter each type of male was.
	"one can conclude that selection [...] had exerted no effect on the grossbody composition of the flies" this statement is incorrect.

Revised Statement: We detected no differences in the grossbody composition between 
	treatments and thus the effect of selection for developmental time on 
	body size was statistically unclear.
	In all lineages, males had smaller body weights than females, which is typical of this species.
	We detected no differences in the difference between treatment-matched male and female body sizes.


Test 3: Virgin Longevity.
"The longevities of the
fast and slow lines of both sexes were lower than control
longevity from generation 4 to 9. From generation 11 onward,
the selected lines as well as the relaxed lines had the same
longevities as the control lines (fig. 6; ANOVAs not shown).
[...]
In the twelfth postselection generation, apart from determining the longevity for the lines at 29°C, longevity was also
measured at 25°C, because possibly longevity differences
were not detectable for relative short adult life span at high
temperature. It clearly stands from table 6 and figure 7, that
life span of Drosophila melanogaster is not influenced by
selection for developmental time, even when possible disrupting selection effects on the genetic background of the
lines would supposedly have disappeared after 12 generations
without selection. There was a significant effect of adult temperature 
and of sex and a significant sex-by-temperature interaction,
with females living longer at 29°C and males living
longer at 25°C (fig. 7). These observations corroborated previous results (Zwaan et al. 1992). It is important to note that
the longevity rank of the lines was not affected by test temperature (replica within treatment by temperature) and that
females from the FA, line consistently had an exceptionally
short life span."

Describe Issues: "The longevities of the
fast and slow lines of both sexes were lower than control
longevity from generation 4 to 9." how much lower?
"From generation 11 onward,
the selected lines as well as the relaxed lines had the same
longevities as the control lines (fig. 6; ANOVAs not shown)." Not sifnificanly different is distinct from The Same. We can't determine what they meant because they didn't include the ANOVA.
Reporting null results is important.
Even though there is a temperature interaction, they should still interpret the main effects. What is the direction of the effect of adult temp for each sex?
"longevity rank of the lines was not affected by test temperature" show us the ANOVA!

Revised Statement: Longevity in both sexes of the fast lines increased/decreased [numerical descriptor] with selection
	while the longevity in both sexes of the slow lines increased/decreased [numeric descriptor] with selection.
From generation 11 onward, we did not detect a difference in longevity between any of the selected lines, the relaxed lines, or the control lines (ANOVA results).
We did not detect an effect of test temperature on longevity rank, but temperature had an effect on longevity such that individuals (regardless of sex) lived (x amount longer/short) 
	for each 1 degree Celsius increase in temperature.
There was a significant effect of adult temperature and of sex and a significant 
	sex-by-temperature interaction, with females living longer at 29°C and males living. 
longer at 25°C (fig. 7).


Bonus Issue: Figure 8 is hard to read

JD: Good attention to effect sizes. Could they also have benefited from more attention to CIs? Grade: 2.1/3. 

Bonus: You have a tendency to type authours instead of authors.
